**What is this paper?**

# What is Phylogenetic Transfer Learning

## Ancestral State Reconstruction

*Ancestral State Reconstruction* (ASR; also called ancestral character
reconstruction, character estimation, or character mapping) is a core
topic in phylogenetics [@Joy2016AncRec].

The goal is, given an estimate of a phylogeny $\mathcal{P}$ and trait
values $T_i$ for each extant species in the phylogeny $i$, to estimate
the value of that trait at some historical point in the phylogeny
(typically at the node representing the MRCA of a clade of interest).

To do this, one assumes a statistical model of evolution (and often
tries to infer the best among a set of candidate models). Depending on
whether the trait of interest is discrete or continuous, the models are
typically discrete-space Markov chains (where the transition matrix is a
target of inference) or, in the continuous setting, either Brownian
Motion or an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process (where the parameters of
the model are the target of inference). The former is models neutral
evolution and the latter is used when there is hypothesized selection on
the trait.

The methodology used to fit models has followed the historical
progression from maximum parsimony models (a naive approach that favors
as few evolutionary changes as possible in discrete traits) to maximum
likelihood estimation. Modern methods revolve on using Bayesian methods,
which has the direct benefit of including uncertainty estimates in
infered ancestral states, and potentially uncertainty in the true
topology of the phelogeny itself [@Huelsenbeck2001EmpHie].

Typically rate of trait evolution is learned as a single value across
the whole phylogeny, and branch length enables 'amount' of evolution.

Although in principle a hierarchical\* model could be used to infer both
a global rate of evolution and rate values specific to each branch
(\*sadly 'hierarchical' in this is sense different than 'hierarchical'
as it is used in @Huelsenbeck2001EmpHie, which refers to different tree
models but a single set of parameters across all branches---this is
because these models are constructed in the context of DNA substition
rates, which are assumed to be fixed).

## Phylogenetic Transfer Learning

The core goal of Phylogenetic Transfer Learning (PTL) is to take a
phylogeny $\mathcal{P}$ where the species pool consists of two types of
species: (1) species with trait observations, which we denote
$\mathcal{O}$ and call the *observed* species and (2) species *without*
trait observatoins, which we denote $\mathcal{U}$ and call *unobserved*,
and produce predicted trait values for the unobserved species
$\mathcal{U}$.

PTL does this by using ASR to infer a parameterized model of evolution
and ancestral state of the partially observed trait, and then to
simulate the parameterized evolutionary model forward from the ancestral
node to get an estimate of trait values (with uncertainty) for each
species in $U$.

The *transfer learning* component in particular comes from the first use
of this methods to inpute latent representations of species based on
their position in food-webs [@Strydom2022FooWeb; @Strydom2022GraEmb],
although the method if flexible enough to be applied to either latent or
observed traits.

There are two possible models for PTL to be done in: (1) As in
[@Strydom2022FooWeb], the the evolutionary model is inferred only from
the observed trait values $O$. (2) The evolutionary model from a trait
for which there are observations available for the entire species pool.
It may be the case that evolutionary dynamics inferred with auxillary
available information for every species (e.g. the raw sequences from
which the tree is built) could improve imputation accuracy.

# Substance of the paper

1.  Simulated phylogenies
    -   Test predictive efficacy of PTL under various parameterization
        of the "ground-truth" evolutionary dynamics
        -   Rate of speciation
        -   Rate of evolution
        -   Trait dimensionality & correlation
        -   Frequency of "puntuactions" (i.e. pertubations to trait
            value at a speciation event)
    -   Predictive efficancy under different data scenarios
        -   Proportion of species with trait values
        -   Predictive efficacy vs. distance to MRCA w/ data
        -   Do we have a set of traits for all species to infer
            evolutionary dynaimcs?
            -   How correlated are evolution between traits for all
                species vs. traits we want to impute
2.  Real data

Thankfully there are lots of ACR studies out there with data for each
extant species. So, in short, find as many ACR studies as we can,

Relevant questions we want to address: - What phylogenetic scales can
PTL give robust predictions - There is a clear upper limit (if the MRCA
for set of species is too long ago, there will be massive variance in
predicted state at the tip) - There is also a lower limit (if there is
horizontal-gene-transfer and the phylogeny is not a reliable proxy for
how traits are evolving) - Robustness to noise in trait measurements? -
How does this very w/ amount and different types of selection - When is
PTL overkill? - Weighted average of neighbors by distance as alternative
(ack. David Rolnick for idea)

# Possible Applications

The core idea of PTL is to fill in gaps for data-sparse processes in
ecology.

-   Link prediction
-   SDMs: mechanistic niche predictions on subsets of species
-   Connectivity [@Catchen2023ImpEco]
